#################
Second year notes
#################
The aim of this project is to create a comprehensive set of notes on the course
material covered by the whole of the second year of the BSc Computer Science
course at the University of Manchester.

As always, if you're revising from these notes, don't trust the material at all;
I don't have a doctorate degree, and lots of the content here hasn't been
proofread particurlaly thoroughly. I've described the state of the notes (at the
time of me finishing my first semester exams) below. Pull requests are very much
appreciated, especially if you find content that isn't correct, or is of
questionable quality.

COMP21111
---------
I only wrote notes for the first part of the course since after that, I started
running out of time and jumped to revising with past papers. I didn't bother
with making a serious effort on the flashcards either really.

COMP23111
---------
I'd describe my Databases notes as complete, however, I only used the lecture
slides to make notes, not the handouts (which contain much more information),
and I (this was a mistake) glossed very quickly over both functional
dependencies and normalisation. The flashcards aren't bad.

COMP23420
---------
Contains about three lectures worth of *actual* notes, however, I did manage to
scrape a load of questions off a website (I can't remember where now), and turn
them (very hastily) into flashcards, which are a quite useful resource in my
opinion.

COMP24111
---------
I think these notes cover most of the content; at least, the only thing that I
missed out was the very last bit of Ke's very last lecture (about clustering
evaluation). I apologise for the Scala in the first part ;)

COMP25111
---------
Pretty sure this one covers most of the course. The first section (about the
MU0) isn't needed for the exam, and the corresponding flashcards aren't either.
I think the Unix, Windows and File management sections could do with a bit of
fleshing out, but most of the information is there.

COMP26120
---------
There's really not much content to write notes on for this course, especially
since one exam question is usually about writing psudo code (which I don't think
is a good use of time to write notes on). I did gloss over complexity a little,
particurlaly big theta and big omega.
